.. _2017_risk_lbwsg:

====================================
Low Birth Weight and Short Gestation
====================================

Risk Description
-------------------

Case definition in GBD 2017
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The meaning of the “low birth weight” and “short gestation” in GBD have subtle
definitional differences compared to other usages of “low birth weight” and
“short gestation” in literature. The term “low birth weight” has historically
been used to refer to birth weight (BW) less than 2500 grams. However, because
the goal of the GBD risk factors analysis is to quantify the entirety of
attributable burden due to each risk factor, the GBD definition of “low birth
weight” therefore refers to all birth weight below the Theoretical Minimum Risk
Exposure Level (TMREL) for birth weight. Likewise, new-borns have been typically
been classified into gestational age (GA) categories of “extremely preterm” (<28
weeks of gestation), “very preterm” (28-<32 weeks of gestation), and “moderate
to late preterm” (32-<37 weeks of gestation). “Short gestation” in GBD refers to
all gestational ages below the gestational age TMREL.

Exposures and relative risks for the GBD Low birth weight and short gestation
risk factors are divided into joint 500-gram birth weight and 2-week gestational
age combinations. The lowest risk overall 500- gram/2-week bin is the overall
TMREL. The univariate TMRELs vary with GA and BW. The lowest risk GA varies by
BW category and the lowest risk BWs vary with GA category. The latter are used
to quantify univariate attributable risk. Under this framework, all attributable
burden under the joint TMREL is referred to jointly as burden of LBWSG. All
attributable burden to BWs under the TMREL for each GA category are, on
aggregate, “low birth weight” and all attributable burden to GAs under the TMREL
for each BW category are, on aggregate, “short gestation.” Each combination of
500-grams and 2-wks is associated with a relative risk for mortality by neonatal
period (early and late neonatal) and by the causes listed in Table 2 and
described below, and relative to the joint TMREL.

.. todo::

   Discribe the Low Birthweight and Short Gestation risk.  Note that the cause
   :ref:`Neonatal preterm birth complications  <2017_cause_neonatal_preterm>` is
   100% attributable to this risk.
